---
title: 7.1 - Introduction to Forms
metadata:
  - Can be provided
  - as: objects
    or: arrays
---
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Forms are HTML elements that take in user input. Forms hold form elements, such as `input`, `select`, or `button`. We can use them to create useful applications, such as a user sign-up page.

---

### What are Forms?

Think of a user sign-up page. It might have many fields for a new user to create a password, input their name, etc. All of these elements would be contained in a Form HTML element. 

**`<form>` is an HTML element which designates a section of webpage that takes in user input.** It contains various "form elements" for different types of inputs. 

```jsx
<form>
  .
  form elements
  .
</form>
```

---

### Form Elements
The HTML `<form>` element can contain one or more form elements. Here are 4 key form elements, though there are many more. A full list of HTML elements can be found here: [HTML Form Elements](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_form_elements.asp).

---

#### Input Element

##### Type Attribute
`<input>` is a versatile form element. It takes in an optional `type` attribute, which controls what kind of input box is displayed. A few possible `type` values are: "text", "password", "email", "date", and "checkbox". 

:::tip
The default value of the `type` attribute is "text".
:::

A full list of `input` types can be found here: [HTML Form Input Types](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_form_input_types.asp).

##### Placeholder Attribute
`<input>` also takes in an optional `placeholder` attribute, which specifies a short hint that describes the expected value of an input field (e.g. a sample value or a short description of the expected format).

The short hint is displayed in the input field before the user enters a value.

:::note
The `placeholder` attribute works with the following input types: text, search, url, number, tel, email, and password.
:::

---

#### Label Element
`<label>` is an element that labels another form element. It takes in an optional `for` attribute, which should be equal to the `id` attribute of the `input` element to bind them together.

---

#### Input and Label Examples
Here is how you might use the `input` and `label` elements together:

##### Text example
```jsx
<form>
  <label for="fullName">Full name</label><br>
  <input type="text" id="fullName" name="fullName">
</form>
```
##### Email example (with placeholder)
```jsx
<form>
  <label for="email">Email</label><br> 
  <input type="email" id="email" name="email" placeholder="name@example.com">      
</form>
```
##### Password example
```jsx
<form>
  <label for="password">Password</label><br>
  <input type="password" id="password" name="password"><br>
</form>
```

---

#### Select Element
The `<select>` element is a dropdown menu. The `<select>` element itself contains multiple `<option>` elements.

By default, the `<select>` element lets users **select only one** option.

##### Default Option
The default option selected is by default the **first option**. 

:::tip
A nice trick is to use the first option as a placeholder, a sort of hint to the user (e.g. "Select only one option"). The associated `value` of the `option` can be "".
:::

---

#### Button Element
`<button>` defines a clickable button. It takes in a `type` attribute, which controls the default behavior of the button. The three possible `type` values are: "submit", "reset", and "button".

:::note
Always specify the `type` attribute for the button element. Different browsers may use different default types for the button element.
:::

##### Submission
The main button `type` value you will use is "submit". This is the default if the `type` attribute is not specified or is empty/invalid. Clicking a `<button type="submit">` will trigger the `onSubmit` event.

---

#### Select and Button example
```jsx
<label for="pet-select">Choose a pet:</label>

<select name="pets" id="pet-select">
  <option value="">--Choose an option--</option>
  <option value="dog">Dog</option>
  <option value="cat">Cat</option>
  <option value="hamster">Hamster</option>
</select><br>

<button type="submit">Submit</button>
```
