---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# 1.1 Basic Syntax

## Comments and logging

JavaScript has the same comments syntax as many other languages. You can use `//` for single-line comments and `/* */` for multi-line comments.

```javascript
// This is a single-line comment

/*
This is a 
multi-line comment
*/
```

The most basic way you can view the output of some code execution is by logging the result to the console. You can do this using the `console.log()` function.

```javascript
console.log("Hello, world!");
```

## Variables and Primitive Types

Mutable variables are declared with the `let` keyword, while immutable variables are declared with the `const` keyword (short for constant).

```javascript
let age = 20;
age += 1; // Increment by one

const name = "Alice"; // Immutable
```

Unlike languages like C, or Java, JavaScript is dynamically typed. This means you can change the type of a variable at any time, however, you should avoid doing this as it can lead to bugs.

The main primitive types in JavaScript are:

```javascript
const num = 5; // Number
const str = "Hello, world!"; // String
const bool = true; // Boolean
const nullValue = null; // Null
const undefinedValue = undefined; // Undefined
```

Also note that variables and functions in JavaScript are typically written in camelCase.

## Functions

Functions can be defined using the `function` keyword.

```javascript
// Name is a function parameter
function greet(name) {
  // This is a template string, which allows you to embed variables in a string
  return `Hello ${name}`;
}

// Call the function
const greeting = greet("Alice");
console.log(greeting); // Prints "Hello Alice"
```

However, in many cases you will see functions declared using arrow syntax. This shortened syntax is used most often for inline functions.

```javascript
const goodbye = (name) => {
  return `Goodbye ${name}`;
};
```

The arrow syntax can be further shortened if the function only has one statement. In this case, the return statement is implicit.

```javascript
const goodbye = (name) => `Goodbye ${name}`;
console.log(goodbye("Alice")); // Prints "Goodbye Alice"
```

## Control Flow

The JavaScript `or`, `and`, and `not` operators are `||`, `&&`, and `!`, respectively. They work much like their counterparts in other languages.

All values in JavaScript are truthy except for `false`, `0`, `""` (empty string), `null`, `undefined`, and `NaN`.

When checking for equality or inequality in JavaScript, it is imperative to use `===` and `!==` to ensure that objects must be of the same type to be considered equal. There are almost zero scenarios where you should use `==` or `!=`, as they can lead to unexpected behavior.

```javascript
const fiveNum = 5;
const fiveStr = "5";

if (fiveNum == fiveStr) {
  console.log("This code will run!");
}
if (fiveNum === fiveStr) {
  console.log("This code will not run!");
}
```

JavaScript loves to give options for writing code in shorthand. One such shorthand is the ternary operator, which is a one-liner if-else statement. The following two functions are equivalent, but the second is much more concise.

```javascript
function saloonGreeting(age) {
  if (age >= 21) {
    return "Welcome stranger";
  } else {
    return "No youngins allowed";
  }
}
```

The ternary operator evaluates the condition, and if it is true, it returns the first value, otherwise it returns the second value.

```javascript
const saloonGreeting = (age) =>
  age >= 21 ? "Welcome stranger" : "No youngins allowed";
```
